With a grasp of what a function looks like we can now look at some basic forms function might come in. This is useful later when we want to look at a function that is maybe a little more complex and be able to analyze it.

### 2.2.1.1 Constant functions

These functions are surprisingly useful to be able to recognize, especially where you're working with differentiation. More on that later. They are also the easiest to recognize and use.

Constant functions as the name suggests, are functions with a constant value.

**Example 2.2.1.1.1**

$f(x) = c$ , $c\in R$

In other words for all inputs to the function, the function will always output $c$ where $c$ is some member of the set of real numbers.

**Example 2.2.1.1.2**

$f(x)=4$

**Plot 2.2.1.1.1**

```functionplot
---
title:
xLabel: x
yLabel: y
bounds: [-7, 7, -2, 10]
disbaleZoom: 1
grid: true
---
f(x)= (4)
```

Here we can see exactly what this function is telling us. Whatever you put into it, -7 or 6 for the variable $x$, you will always get the same result. In this case 4.

### 2.2.1.2 Identity functions

As the name suggests, these are functions that behave like an identity between input and output. In other words the input always equals the output.

**Example 2.2.1.2.1**

$g(x)=x$

Because how this works may not be immediate apparent, simply replace $g(x)$ with $y$ and it will be obvious:

**Example 2.2.1.2.2**

$y=x$

**Plot 2.2.1.2.1**

```functionplot
---
title:
xLabel: x
yLabel: y
bounds: [-7, 7, -2, 10]
disbaleZoom: 1
grid: true
---
f(x)= (x)
```

This function as can be seen has a particularly interesting property in that it cuts a line through the midpoint of the lower left and the upper right quadrants. In fact it does this in such a way that each of the following observations is true:

1. If you rotate the line about the origin twice you get the same function.
2. If you rotate about the origin once you would get the negative of the original function
3. the value of the slope is always 1, which as we start to look more closely at derivative we will see because the equation for this line is $y=mx+b \ = \ 1 \cdot x + 0$.
4. The angle from the $x$ or $y$ axis and the line is always $\pm  {45}^{\circ}$.

### 2.2.1.3 Linear functions

In fact the identity function is just a special case of a linear function, so called in part because of the straight line we get when we plot them graphically. In fact linear functions are entire class of functions and so we will only give enough depth here to move on. Linear functions will become increasingly important as we start to discuss Calculus, Vectors and Matrices where more information and formulas will be given.

We saw that the constant and identity functions produced a straight line. These functions have some common features. First (please forgive defining a feature with a negative), they don't have powers greater than 1. That is the highest power is equations is $x^1$.

Secondly, linear functions functions can be expressed in one of a number of ways depending on what we want to see. On the whole given in the following form:

**Example 2.2.1.3.1**

$f(x)=mx+b$

**In this formulation:**
- $m$ is the slope
- $x$ is our input value
- $b$ is the $y$ intercept

**Example 2.2.1.3.2**

$f(x) = 2x+3$

**Plot 2.2.1.3.1**

```functionplot
---
title:
xLabel: x
yLabel: y
bounds: [-7, 7, -2, 10]
disbaleZoom: 1
grid: true
---
f(x)= (2x+3)
```

**Note the following features:**
1. The line crosses the y-axis at 3
2. For every increment in the $x$ direction we can see that the function value increases by 2

In other words the equation $mx+b$ captures very nicely important features of the line.

We might also find one of the following:

**Point-Slope Form:**

$y−y1​=m(x−x1​)$

Here if we know some point $(x_{1}, y_{1})$ and the slope $m$ we can find the line.

**Standard form:**

$Ax+By=C$

In this form, $A, B, C$ are integers, and $A$ and $B$ are not both zero. This form is often used in systems of linear equations and for finding intercepts.

**Intercept Form**:

$\frac{x}{a}+\frac{x}{b}=1$

This form is used when the x-intercept (a) and the y-intercept (b) are known. It's particularly useful in geometry and graphical representations.

**Two-Point Form**:

$\frac{y-y_{1}}{y_{2}-y_{1}} = \frac{x-x_{1}}{x_{2}-x_{1}}$

This is used when you have two known points $(x_{1}, y_{1})$ and $(x_{2}, y_{2})$ on the line. It's a specific case of the point-slope form.

We will discuss some of these forms later when we review vectors.

Some important takeaways when looking at linear functions will

### 2.2.1.4 Absolute value functions

Absolute value functions are very good at showing how and why a function does what it does. For an absolute value function the output is always the absolute value of whatever computation is done.

**Example 2.2.1.4.1**

$f(x) = |x|$

Is an example of the simplest equation of this form.

**Plot 2.2.1.4.1**

```functionplot
---
title:
xLabel: x
yLabel: y
bounds: [-7, 7, -2, 10]
disbaleZoom: 1
grid: true
---
f(x)= abs(x)
```

As we can see here the plot has an interesting property we'll see in the quadratic function that we saw in our review of notation; the function's output always has a positive value, irrespective of the input's sign. In other words, the function take the input and computes the output such that it is always positive.

It is a functions ability to *transform* an input into some other shape that makes it such a powerful tool, in fact machine learning and artificial intelligence rely on functions in this way.

In this example we can see that the function gives us, say for an input of $-2$, $y=2$ and so on. We can increase the complexity as much as we like, for which we can get some very interesting results.

**Example 2.2.1.4.2**

Let us contrast the absolute value of a function with the same function whose absolute value we don't take.

$f(x) = |x^3-20|$
$g(x) = x^3 - 20$
$h(x) = x^3$

**Plot 2.2.1.4.2**

```functionplot
---
title:
xLabel: x
yLabel: y
bounds: [-10, 10, -25, 25]
disbaleZoom: 1
grid: true
---
f(x)= abs(x^3-20)
g(x)= (x^3-20)
h(x)= x^3
```

Only one of these functions has negative values. In this example $f(x)$ makes a sort of v shape with a kink in the left hand side at $y=20$, we can see this same kink going in the other direction for $g(x)$ at $y=-20$. We can see that the kink on either side of the equation occurs where $x=0$.

We have added $h(x)=x^3$ to provide contrast. Here we can see this same shifting across and between $y=-1$ and $y=1$, which makes sense when we consider what happens when we cube values between o and 1.

What's interesting from observing the absolute value function is how much a simple change to the function can change it's shape in such a radical way. We can see how a function takes in some value and applies the rules of the function to compute some new value.
Furthermore we can start to see how the shape of the output hinges on the structure of the function itself and how various rules relate to each other. As we start to look at function transformations we will see that these structural variations also have standard forms.

### 2.2.1.5 Quadratic functions

Quadratic functions are a part of a class of functions we will deal with extensively later. Here we are primarily concerned with the most basic form of the quadratic function.

**Example 2.2.1.5.1**

$f(x) = x^2$

**Plot 2.2.1.5.1**

```functionplot
---
title:
xLabel: x
yLabel: y
bounds: [-10, 10, -5, 50]
disbaleZoom: 1
grid: true
---
f(x)= (x^2)
```

As we noted in section 2.1 we can see that this function does not produce any negative values of $y$. Because we multiple two negatives together for values $x>0$, we always end up with values of $y$ such that the upper left quadrant always mirrors the upper right quadrant. This gives the function the appearance of a curved version of the absolute value function (if we don't take the multiplication into account). It is the fundamental reason we see a parabola.

Quadratic functions introduce a new consideration into function equations that at first is not obvious, but later will become impossible to ignore. This consideration is the consideration of the highest power in the equation. When the highest power was $x^1$ there is no contrast to be made. Now that we have more than one power (what is in reality three degrees of power if we include $x^0$) it is worth observing what a highest power does to a function.

**Example 2.2.1.5.2**

$f(x)= x^2+2x+3$
$g(x) = (x^2)\cdot(2x+3)$
$h(x) = x^2\cdot \log(x)$
$p(x) = x^2+3$

**Plot 2.2.1.5.2**

```functionplot
---
title:
xLabel: x
yLabel: y
bounds: [-10, 10, -4, 10]
disbaleZoom: 1
grid: true
---
f(x)= (x^2+2x+3)
g(x) = (x^2)(2x+3)
h(x) = (x^2)(log(x))
p(x) = (x^2)+3
```

Here we have three interesting functions in their own right, each demonstrating what can happen when we lead with a quadratic. Each shows in a different way the impact of the quadratic, or leading power on the rest of the function.

Let us start with $f(x) = x^2+2x+3$. Observe the function at $x=0$, here we can see that the value of the function is 3. This should not be surprising given that the $0^2=0$ and $2\cdot 0=0$. So the y-intercept holds. Furthermore we can see that adding 3 means that the function moves upwards on the y-coordinate.

We can also see however, relative to $p(x)=x^2+3$ that the function is shifted left and down, that is, the vertex of the function is in the upper left quadrant and below $y=3$. Here we want to look at the vertex form of the function (discussed later when we review polynomials).

This is given by changing the function into vertex form; $f(x) = a(x – h)^2 + k$. As this will be covered in more detail later when we work through polynomials we will just note that $h=-1$ and $k=2$. So our vertex has been transformed to $(-1, 2)$. Despite these transformations, we can see that they are applied to the term with the highest power.

Similarly if we look at $g(x) = (x^2)\cdot(2x+3)$, we see something very interesting. We get the form of a cubic function $x^3$. That is because the given form is not the simplest form of the equation. In fact the function simplifies to $2x^3+3x^2$. Even though the second term of this distributed form has 3 as a coefficient, the higher powered term dominates the function given the shape that we see.

In the final example $h(x) = x^2\cdot \log(x)$ we have a very interesting function where the leading term's effect is very subtle. We can see from the graph below that $log(x)$ continues to $-\infty$ as it gets closer and closer to 0. However, in the case of $x^2\cdot \log(x)$, $x^2$ has a more powerful effect. We will see why this is when we review L'Hôpital's rule in our discussion of limits.

**Plot 2.2.1.5.3**

```functionplot
---
title:
xLabel: x
yLabel: y
bounds: [-10, 10, -4, 10]
disbaleZoom: 1
grid: true
---
f(x)= (log(x))
g(x)= (x^2)
h(x) = (x^2)(log(x))
```

We can also see some other features that are interesting relative to $x^2$. For example and around 2.7 $x^2 \cdot log(x)$ starts to increase at a faster rate. We can see this because the functions cross each other at that point. In fact, for $x>1$, $log(x)$ is positive which explains why we suddenly see the function stretch up at this point.

Here we had a cursory review of three functions with complex behaviors, all of which capable of significantly more depth. That will come as start to explore the more complex behaviors of functions. For now, let us be content understanding first, what a quadratic function is and does. Secondly, the impact of a leading power on the functions that contain them.

### 2.2.1.6 Cubic functions

We started to see cubic functions in the previous section on quadratic functions, as well as a comparison feature in our review of absolute value functions. One feature we saw was that unlike quadratics, cubic function have negative values. Cubic functions add an additional sets of considerations for our analysis of standard functions, namely; multiplicity, turning points and end-behavior which, as we will see are visibly different for our cubic function.

**Example 2.2.1.6.1**

$f(x)=x^3$

**plot 2.2.1.6.1**

```functionplot
---
title:
xLabel: x
yLabel: y
bounds: [-5, 5, -30, 30]
disbaleZoom: 1
grid: true
---
f(x)= (x + 0)^3
```

Let's start just by looking at the obvious features we can see.
- We can see that the lower left and upper right quadrants reflect each other. Once across the x-axis and once across the y-axis
- We can also see that in these two quadrants the function seems to go up or down infinitely
- We can also see that close to zero on either side the function flattens out

Each of these features is easy enough to explain. Negative numbers continue infinitely because 3 negative numbers multiplied together gives us a negative number. Whereas $(-1)\cdot(-1)=1$, once we add an addition $(-1)$, we can take the result of multiplying twice and multiply again with one more $(-1)$. In other words we have $1\cdot(-1)=-1$. We know that the curve continues either to $-\infty$ and $+\infty$ because for any negative number we can think of, there is one number less than that number which will produce an even greater negative number when cubed. Likewise, the same logic holds in the positive direction (note that this alludes to our later definition of the limit). We also know the function flattens out close to zero, which again is unsurprising given that the cubes get smaller as their input values get smaller.

As visible as these behaviors are, they mask some additional behaviors we can contrast with our earlier quadratics. First, let us look the behavior of the graph crossing the x-intercept. We can contrast this with the quadratic which just touches the x-intercept and changes direction. We could also contrast that with a linear equation which crosses the x-intercept, but without using the s-shape produced by the cubic.

We can generalize this observation and note that the number of factors, that is the number of times we can factor an equation tells us this behavior. For example:

**Example 2.2.1.6.2**

- $(x+0)^1=x^1=x$, which crosses the x-intercept without changing direction.
- $(x+0)^2=(x+0)\cdot(x+0)=x^2$, which doesn't cross the x-intercept.
- $(x+0)^3=(x+0)\cdot(x+0)\cdot(x+0)=x^3$, which is the plot above, i.e. crosses with the s-shape we see.

This is called the 'multiplicity' of the function and we can do quite a bit of analysis with it. For example, if we set the factored expression to 0, we will find the x-intercept.

**Example 2.2.1.6.3**

We can see the the x-intercept in the following equation is $+3$.
$(a)\ (x-3)^3=0$
$(b)\ (x^3-3^3) = 0$
$(c)\ x^3=9$
$(d)\ x=3$

The next contrast is the number of times the function changes direction (the number of time it goes $down \rightarrow up$ or $up \rightarrow down$). We see, where we have $x^1$ the function doesn't change direction, with $x^2$ it changes direction once and with $x^3$ it changes direction twice. If we were to continue with increasing powers $(4, 5, \dots, n)$ we would find that the number of changes in direction will always be no more than $n-1$.

What we are starting to observe then are some of the ways we can analyze and also understand the behaviors of our functions as we increase the complexity of the terms. We are starting to see that the sharpness of the curve, the way it crosses the x-axis, where is crosses the x and y axis as well as its limits and bounds are contained in various terms. We are also starting to see the role that leading terms have on the functions as well as how we can start to think about the impact of different terms on the overall shape and position of the function.

### 2.2.1.7 Quartic functions

We won't spend too long with these functions as we've covered most of what needs to be covered in our examination of linear, quadratic and cubic functions. Instead we will continue to show how what we've seen continues as we increase the power of the function.

**Example 2.2.1.7.1**

$f(x)=x^4\cdot\sqrt{(3x^4)+(2x^3)+(x^2)}$
$g(x)=\frac{x^4}{\sqrt{(3x^4)+(2x^3)+(x^2)}}$

```functionplot
---
title:
xLabel: x
yLabel: y
bounds: [-2, 2, -1, 8]
disbaleZoom: 1
grid: true
---
f(x)= (x^4)sqrt((3x^4)+(2x^3)+(x^2))
g(x)= (x^4)/sqrt((3x^4)+(2x^3)+(x^2))
```

Here we have two functions with exactly the same terms and very different behaviors. They both have their vertex at 0 and their curves turn upwards. However, this is where the similarity ends. This happens because the leading terms have a degree of 4, which influences the overall behavior of the function. We could flip the functions over the x-axis by multiplying either of them by $-1$.

Furthermore, we can see that the curve in both cases resembles a stretched or flattened parabola. This should not be surprising given that $x^4=x^2\cdot x^2$. In both cases this dominates the function, the square root modifies its curve and not the other way around. If we multiply or divide by the square root given in these functions, we will multiply or divide by a value that is increasingly smaller than our leading function. This is evident by the fact that $\sqrt{x^4}=x^2$. In the case of our function $f(x)$, this stretches the function such that from about 0.5 it starts to increase more and more rapidly. In $g(x)$ on the other hand we see that although the function is increasing in both upper right and upper left quadrants, it's increase is slower, but never flattened or reversed.

What this illustrates hopefully, is just how interesting functions can be. Here we have two functions with a term that on the surface looks very impressive. There's a square root and a bunch of powers, but next to our simple quartic term this complex looking term can only influence but never dominate. A great deal of what we will see in sections to come will be variations on this theme as well as how we can better analyze these behaviors. 

### 2.2.1.8 Square root functions

### 2.2.1.9 Reciprocal

### 2.2.1.10 Reciprocal squared

### 2.2.1.11 Logarithmic functions

### 2.2.1.12 Trig. functions

### 2.2.1.13 Conclusions
