## Functions and their meaning

Most of this formulary will be concerned functions; their behavior, their meaning and their use. Functions tell us how a variable's change relates to change in another variable. They can also be understood as describing the rules of the relationship between an input and an output. We say that the output is a function of the input.

## Notation: How is a function expressed

To write a function first we need want to declare the function. The declaration of a function itself tells us that there is a relationship. Functions are usually declared with an $'f'$ , a $'g'$ or any other letter of our choosing. Sometimes capital letters are used, but this on the whole tends to be limited to the relationship between differentiated and integrated functions.

Next the relationship to the input needs to be stated. This is done by placing parenthesis and then the input variable (inside the parenthesis) next to the function's letter.

So for example the following are each functions:

$f(x)$
$g(x)$
$y(x)$

It is worth noting that this is convention and functions can also be asserted

$fo(x)$

This latter expression helping us to see that the function is read 'f of x'.

To the right of the function we write the equation that expresses the function. So for example:

$f(x) = x^2$

Is a function that tells us the value of $y$ is $x^2$. That is, the relationship between $f(x)$ and $y$ were we to graph the function is given by $x^2$. Better put, $y$ will always be the value of $x$ squared.

**Example set 1.1.1**
Here are some examples of some simple functions and their corresponding meanings.

2.1.1. $f(x) = x^2+2x$

This function tells us that every time we input a number for $x$ the corresponding $y$ value will be the square of that number plus the value we input multiplied by two.

```functionplot
---
title:
xLabel: x
yLabel: x^2 + 2x
bounds: [-10, 10, -50, 100]
disbaleZoom: 1
grid: true
---
f(x)= (x^2 + 2x)
g(x)= (x^2)
```

The resulting output, as can be seen in the graph is a parabola and has some interesting features. We can see that the overall slope is the same, however, the graph has shifted to the left relative to $x^2$ alone. We can also see that the vertex of the parabola is a little lower. We will how this works when we explore transformations of functions later in the formulary.

We can also see that the function extends infinitely in the positive direction of $y$ whether or not the input is positive or negative. This should come as no surprise after reading section 01 of this formulary. This alludes to the limits of the function as well as its bounds, which we also review later in the text. For now, we can observe that the function does not go below a certain point. We can then say the function is bounded from below.

2.1.2 $t(x) = \sin(x)$

Here we can see a very different kind of a function. Whereas the function in example 2.1.1 is bounded below, but extends infinitely upwards, this function (for reasons we will see when we start to look more closely at trig functions) only goes up to 1 and down to -1. If we continue to infinity we will see that this behavior never changes.

```functionplot
---
title:
xLabel: x
yLabel: sin(x)
bounds: [-3, 3, -2, 2]
disbaleZoom: 1
grid: true
---
t(x)= sin(x)
```

So this function goes across in either direction infinitely, just like the previous function. However, unlike the previous function, this function does not go up infinitely.

While these observations are best suited for a later discussion, they serve to start to show that functions can have very many behaviors and in fact, as we start to dive more and more into differential equations we will see that the complexity with which we can analyze a function increases, but also get more interesting.

More importantly at this stage it is important just to observe that there is a relationship in a function that is being given between some input value which can vary and some output value that is contingent on the input. For these reasons we can call the input ' independent', or just the Independent Variable or IV and the output value 'dependent' or just the Dependent Variable or DV.

Understanding that this relationship exists is fundamentally important, especially as we start to explore functions with several variables, functions that are defined implicitly and work with functions composed of other functions. Having the basic notation down, i.e. being able to see something is a function and being able to express something as a function therefore helps.
